This is a collection of random tips and tricks for those who are starting to play Dungeon Crawl.
Contents

    1 General
    2 Monsters
    3 Items
    4 Spells
    5 Miscellaneous
    6 Fighting Strategies
        6.1 If There is a Monster in View
        6.2 If There is no Monster in View

General

    Don't forget that Dungeon Crawl is a turn-based game; monsters won't act until after you do. If the situation grows dire, stop and think about every aspect before picking a solution and making your move. Indeed, you can even save your game and leave the computer to do something else, then come back later -- some time to calm down and think can often let you salvage a situation that originally looked hopeless. You may have a brilliant idea that you wouldn't have had in the heat of the moment!
        Note that "remembering stuff" costs no game time; this includes looking through your inventory ('i' command), your spells ('z' command followed by '?'), your abilities ('a' command), your maps of the dungeon ('X' command), and using 'ctrl+f' to search for (but not travel to) known items in the dungeon. Note that within the 'X' command, you can use '[' and ']' to switch levels -- to descend into a branch, put the cursor on its entry stair before using ']'.
    You do not have to fight and kill all monsters now (or ever). In roguelike games such as Dungeon Crawl, there is no guarantee that you'll be able to overcome all the challenges you meet, and escaping or ignoring some monsters or branches for the moment is a perfectly valid strategy. Remember, your goal is to survive.
    While it's best to specialize early on and invest all your XP into a couple of skills to ensure you've got some reliable means of surviving, as the game progresses you should diversify your skills to ensure you can meet any challenge.
        Melee fighters might want to learn Spellcasting and dabble in magic, even if its just with Evocations.
        Spellcasters will want to invest some XP into Fighting, Dodging, and perhaps Armour and/or Shields.
        Don't forget about Invocations and Evocations either, depending on your god choice or equipment.
    Early game potion and scroll identification is straightforward for a couple of common items; potions of curing and scrolls of identify are the most common of their type. However, the next most common scroll, the scroll of teleportation, could be troublesome in an uncleared level. You can view item rarity with the \ key (- to see unidentified items).
    Knowing which dungeon branches you should tackle, and in what order, will make your game smooth and your progress quick. See the Walkthrough for more information.
    If you haven't won yet, stick with the basic 3 rune game. As you gain skill, start exploring the optional endgame branches.

Monsters

    Do your best to learn every monster's strengths and weaknesses, behaviour, and pattern of attack. All such information can be found right here on this wiki! Another resource are the Knowledge Bots available in Crawl servers, IRC or the official Crawl website.
    Whenever possible, fight in corridors that are one tile wide to avoid being surrounded by monsters. If there isn't a convenient corridor, you can use a wand of digging to create one. If you use ranged abilities or spells and miss your first target, you even have a chance of hitting the monsters lined up behind it! Doorways are another option, although intelligent monsters will move past you to give their companions a shot at mauling you.
    If neither are available, you can fight on a staircase leading to the previous level. When a monster moves next to you, it will follow you if you go upstairs: you can break up groups of monsters and kill them one by one this way.
    To "pull" single monsters while avoiding their neighbours, shoot them with missiles (such as stones) or with a single target spell like Magic Dart. Yelling (tt) should only be used when you want to wake all nearby creatures, including nearby ones out of sight. Keep in mind that many monsters may make noise if they either get hit or spot you, possibly waking up other monsters nearby.
    Some monsters avoid known traps; you can therefore take shelter behind a trap and kill these creatures with missiles or spells. Likewise, many monsters avoid damaging areas such as clouds of miasma or noxious fumes created by spells like Cigotuvi's Dreadful Rot and Mephitic Cloud. On the other hand, mindless and high level monsters will walk into traps and clouds to get to you; you can exploit this advantage by standing next to a cloud of flame, for example, and letting a zombie toast itself trying to get to you.
    Known teleport traps and shafts can become an emergency means of escape. Step on them to escape a horde of enemies, or trick a tough monster into stepping on them to get rid of them for a while.

Items

    Many items can be identified by trying them out. You can read tips about identifying items this way here. Also, when looking at inventory or stack lists, notice the color items are displayed in, as this can tell you things your character knows but the player might not:

Dark Grey
    Item is currently unusable
Light Grey
    Item is unidentified, or is a standard identified item
Blue
    Item is unidentified and magical
Bright Green
    Item is equipped
White
    Item is a random artefact
Bright Red
    Item is generally harmful to use
Red
    Item is hated by your god
Purple
    Item is potentially dangerous to use (will warn you if you try to use it)
Yellow
    Item is beneficial
Light Blue
    Item is highly beneficial, or an unrand artefact

    You won't be able to carry every worthwhile item you come across, since you're limited to 52 types of items in your inventory. Keep in mind that you can use (ctrl+f) to look for items if you're not sure exactly where you left them. Some players might want to create a centralized stash at a known location.
    A scroll of blinking is the most reliable means of escape for characters early on. Use them wisely to avoid death.
    A scroll of teleportation can also be used to escape, but is riskier - especially if you're on a level you haven't fully explored. It beats a guaranteed chance of death; but as it takes some time to activate, make sure its not guaranteed next turn.

Spells

    Mephitic Cloud is one of the best tools at your disposal. Any monster not resistant to poison can be confused via this spell. While in their confused state, monsters will move and attack randomly, and may even damage themselves or their friends!
    In emergencies, you can use the Sublimation of Blood spell to restore MP if you have a high Necromancy skill and enough HP to spare.
    Blink can be a lifesaver if you get into a jam and need to run away, especially if you're a slow species. Keep in mind that, unlike with a scroll of blinking, you don't get to pick your destination, so you could blink towards trouble.

Miscellaneous

    Each regular level has 3 non-hatch staircases down and 3 staircases up, barring the top and bottom of a branch (which may contain an entrance to another branch). When you see fewer staircases, you know the level is not fully explored yet. The opposite may not be true: just because you see 6 staircases does not mean the level is fully explored. Missing stairs might only be accessible by going through an adjacent level -- some levels are split into multiple disconnected sections, and those sections need not be connected.
    If you're going to stand in one spot for an extremely long period of time -- say, while recovering HP or waiting for a status to time out -- do so on a stairway so you can escape if something dangerous approaches.
    Escape hatches are special one-way staircases that lead you either up or down a floor. They always go to the same spot, but there's no guarantee that a staircase leading back will be anywhere near a hatch's landing point. There's almost never any risk in taking an escape hatch that leads upwards, and can create shortcuts now, or when you've got the Orb of Zot. But taking an escape hatch downwards can be risky, especially if it leads to the bottom floor of a branch.

Fighting Strategies

Whether your character is a melee fighter or a spellcaster, you can use the tactics described below.
If There is a Monster in View

    If the monster cannot move (like a statue or an oklob plant), leave it be and return to kill it once you have cleared the level, assuming you have the tools to do so. If you're not equipped to fight it, just leave.
    If it is a hydra, switch to a flaming, ranged, or non-edged weapon, then proceed as usual (this does not apply to undead hydras -- you may safely use edged weapons on them). If it is a shapeshifter pretending to be a hydra, you may want to wait until it changes form or force it to change form with a wand of polymorph.
    If it is attacking you with an element you don't currently resist but can with appropriate randart weapons or rings, wield/put on that item. Do not switch other equipment (especially body armour), since this will take many turns during which the monster can attack you freely!
    If there is an extremely dangerous monster in view, you may want to kill it as soon as possible, even if it is part of a larger group. If that would be too dangerous, run, teleport or blink away. Dangerous monsters include:
        Paralyzing monsters, such as floating eyes
        Monsters who can summon fiends, such as dread liches and Pandemonium lords
        Tormenting monsters (which remove 35-50% of your HP with a single hit unless you are immune to torment) such as fiends, curse skulls, curse toes, mummy priests, royal mummies, and tormentors.
        Monsters who can cast Lehudib's Crystal Spear, such as deep elf/draconian annihilators, wizards, and ancient liches.
        Mutating monsters: neqoxecs, shining eyes, orbs of fire, and Mnoleg.
        Monsters who attack you using an element you aren't resistant to
        Smiting monsters, such as orc priests and smoke demons
        Unique monsters
    If there are several monsters, retreat to a chokepoint.
    If you get swamped by summoned monsters, go up the stairs. Failing that, try to kill the summoner first, since that will get rid of all their summons.
    If it has a ranged attack, either run up to it to force it into melee or run for cover behind a corner, whichever is faster.
    If your character's life is at risk, read Escaping from (and avoiding) trouble.
    Once all monsters are dead, check any equipment they dropped. ctrl+F will show all items of a type; inputting '.' will show all items on the floor.

If There is no Monster in View

    If you are hurt (and not a Meteoran), rest by holding Shift and pressing '5' on the NumPad until your HP or MP is full. Consumables should generally be saved for emergencies.
    If you are not on a special level, press 'o' to auto-explore.
    If you are on a special level, carefully explore manually in circles from the upstairs until fully cleared and explored. Consider using a scroll of magic mapping if you know there's a dangerous vault somewhere (like in the bottom floor of a branch).
    If you are done exploring the current level, follow the walkthrough for the next steps (which will often be to just continue down, but be careful not to enter branch ends earlier than you should).
